 All right, class, welcome back.  This is our last two weeks. We're going to have a slightly  different schedule for the problem sets.  I'm going to assign something today, which is due next  Wednesday. I'm giving you enough time so  you can plan your moves. Then, I will probably give you  one last problem set with two or three problems on whatever I do  in the class. We'll have to play it by year.  Okay, so this is another new topic on thermodynamics,  a fresh beginning for those who want a fresh beginning.  And there's also stuff you probably have seen in high  school, some of it at least. So, the whole next four lectures  are devoted to the study of heat, temperature,  temperature, things like that.  So, we're going to start with the intuitive definition of  temperature everybody has. So, hang on to that.  That's the right intuition. But as physicists,  of course, we want to be more precise, more careful.  So, let's say you have the notion of hot and cold.  And that requires a little more precision.  That introduces the notion of what is called thermodynamic  equilibrium. Just like mechanical equilibrium,  this is a very important concept.  So, I'll tell you what equilibrium is with a concrete  example. If you take a cup of hot water,  then you take another cup of cold water.  Each cup, if you waited sufficiently long,  is said to be in a state of equilibrium as long as the cups  were isolated from the outside world and not allowed to cool  down or heat up. We think they maintain a certain  temperature. We say it's in a state of  thermal equilibrium because this temperature does not seem to  change. Now, we've not defined what  temperature is actually, but we can talk about whether  whatever it is has changed or not changed.  So, it'll settle down to some temperature.  It'll maintain the temperature. Be very careful.  If you leave a cup of coffee in this room, it will cool down  because the room has got a different temperature.  But I'm talking about a cup of coffee that's been isolated from  everything. It maintains the temperature.  Here's another cup of cold drink at what we feel is a lower  temperature. They're both in a state of  equilibrium. Equilibrium is when the  macroscopic properties of the system have stopped changing.  If you now pour one of these cups into the other one,  that's going to be a period when the system is not in  equilibrium, in the sense that it doesn't have a well-defined  temperature. For example, if you just poured  it from the top, the hot stuff is on the top,  the cold stuff is on the bottom. That's a period of transition  where the temperature of the mixture is.  Some parts are hot, some parts are cold.  That system doesn't have a temperature.  But if you wait long enough until the two parts have gotten  to know each other, they will turn into some  unbrinkable mess. But the nice thing is it'll have  a well-defined temperature. That's again a system in  equilibrium. So, you've got to understand  that temperature and thermal equilibrium represent gross  temperature, the macroscopic properties,  and they're not always defined. At the microscopic level,  it's no secret, we all know everything is made  of atoms and molecules, the atoms and molecules that  form the liquid or the gas always have well-defined states.  Each molecule has a certain location, certain velocity.  But at a macroscopic level, when you don't look into the  fine details, focus on a few things like  this. You don't always have a  well-defined value. That's what you've got to  understand. Things have a well-defined  value when they have settled down.  How long does it take to settle down?  That's a matter of what system you're studying.  But generally, you can all tell when it has  settled down. Here's another example.  Suppose you take a gas and you put it inside this piston here,  put some gas inside, you put some weights,  and everything is in equilibrium.  Everything is in equilibrium because the macroscopic things,  things you can see with your naked eye, nothing is changing.  It's going to just sit there. But if you suddenly now remove,  say, a third of the weights, the piston's going to rise up,  shake around a little bit, maybe settle down in a new  location. If you wait a few seconds,  then the new location will again settle down,  and you won't see anything with naked eyes that looks like  a piston. In between, you will see the  piston moving, the gas is turbulent,  the pressure is high in some regions, low in some regions,  then it settles down. This is the notion of systems  in equilibrium. And in between,  there are states of the system which are not in equilibrium.  Now, whenever a system is in such equilibrium,  we can assign to it a temperature that we call T.  We don't know anything about this temperature,  so we're going to build it up from scratch,  other than your instinctive feeling for what temperature is.  One of the laws of thermodynamics called the  zeroth law. The zeroth law,  because they wrote down the first law, then they went back  and had an idea which was even more profound,  and they said, we'll call it zeroth law.  Zeroth law says, if A and B are at the same  temperature, and B and C are at the same  temperature, then A and C are at the same  temperature. I see disbelief in the audience  thing. Why do you call this a law?  Look, I think that is the key to our being able to speak about  temperature globally, is the assumption that if I  take a thermometer and measure something there,  then I come back and dip the thermometer here,  and it reads the same number, then I may conclude these two  entities, which never met each other  directly, are also at the same temperature.  That seems pretty obvious to you, but that is the whole  notion of temperature is predicated on the fact that you  can define an attribute called temperature that can be  globally compared between two systems that never met  directly, but met a third system.  Okay, so once we have some idea of hot and cold,  let us decide now to be more quantitative.  It's like saying somebody's tall and short is not enough.  We go into how tall, how many feet,  how many inches, how many millimeters.  So, we want to get quantitative.  All we have right now is an ocean of hot and cold,  so what we try to do is to find some way to be more precise  about how hot and how cold.  So, what people said is, let's look at some things in  the world that seem to depend on temperature.  One thing that seems to depend on temperature is the  following. You take this meter stick in  the National Bureau of Standards, kept in some glass  case at some temperature. You pull it out or make a  duplicate of it. You pull it outside and leave  it in the room. What you may find is,  if the room was hotter than the glass case,  this rod then expands to a new length.  So, one rod is outside the case, one rod is inside the case,  so the comparison is meaningful.  Nothing has been done to this guy in the air-conditioned glass  case, but this one is expanding.  So, one way to define temperature is to simply ask,  how long is this rod, and somehow correlate the  length of the rod with temperature by some fashion.  So, you can do that. So, what you need to do that,  what you need to do first is to define, put some markings on it  so that for each extra something it grows,  we can say the temperature has gone up by some amount.  So, there we need units for temperature.  And you need some standards, just like this meter stick.  You know, it's not, nothing intrinsic in nature  about a meter. We just made it up and said,  let's call that a meter. In the case of the meter,  the zeroth law is, if you bring a meter stick next  to mine and we agree, you can take the meter stick  somewhere else and define that to be the meter.  Because if this stick is as long as that one and as long as  that one, then those two are equal in  length. For temperature,  you're similarly going to use this rod and say,  if this rod has a certain length when it's kept on top of  this bucket of some fluid and has the same length when I keep  it on that bucket, then the two buckets are at the  same temperature. So, we can use markings on this  rod compared to the unexpanded length as a measure of  temperature. So, what people do is to pick  something a little easier than this rod.  Notice the liquids expand when you heat them.  That's why in a summer day, if you fill your gas tank,  you have to leave some room at the top so that the overflow can  come out of the top, or you shouldn't fill it  completely. Otherwise, it'll burst the  tank. So, liquids expand.  So, one way to measure temperature maybe,  take some liquid, put it there,  and then put it on hot rooms and maybe watch the liquid  expand. And then draw some markings,  and each marking can be a certain temperature.  But people had a better idea than this one.  They had the following idea of a thermometer where you have a  lot of fluid in a reservoir, a very thin tube evacuated at  the top, and the fluid then is here.  So, what's clever about this is that if this expands by 1%,  your eyes should be good enough to see 1% increase in height.  If this fluid expands by 1% in volume, that 1% in volume and  it climbs up this narrow tube can climb to quite a bit,  because the extra volume you get by expansion will be the area  of this tube times the extra Δx by which it expands.  So, you're magnifying the expansion by making all the  fluid in the tube to climb up this extremely narrow tube.  In fact, the tube is so narrow you cannot probably even see it  well, which is why they have a little prism that magnifies the  mercury or alcohol in a thermometer.  Okay, so we have some way of following temperature now.  We can draw some lines, arbitrary lines,  doesn't matter. That can be 0,  that can be 5, that can be 19.  You just got to make sure it's monotonic.  Whenever it's on 21, we may argue that 21 is now  hotter than 19. But you want a better scale  than that. Even though that's mathematically  adequate in practice, what people decide is to do  it as follows. They said,  we want to set up thermometers so that people all over the  world, in different parts of the world,  different countries, different labs can all agree.  So, we will make it possible for everyone to make their own  thermometer by the following recipe.  So, we have this guy in a bucket which has got some ice  and some water. That's called the melting  point of water, or the freezing point of  water, melting point of ice or the freezing point of water,  it doesn't matter. We notice that as water cools  down in the world around us, suddenly ice cubes begin to  form. We go to the temperature at  which that happens for the first time, and we dip the  thermometer there, and whatever reading we get,  it turns out to be 0 degrees Centigrade.  That is just a definition. We believe that's a good  definition because people all over the world can do that.  Of course, if you live in Kuwait, that's not going to work  for you. There's no ice.  But they've figured out, in parts of the world where  you had ice, this is a very good definition.  You get ice, you got 0 degrees.  Then they said, let's find another universally  possible thing, which as you all know is the  boiling point of water. If you put water on the stove,  it heats up and heats up and heats up, and suddenly it begins  to bubble and boil and evaporate.  That temperature is going to be called 100 degrees,  100 degrees Centigrade. Then, you take this column  between 0 and 100, and you divide it into 100  degrees Centigrade, and that is postulated to be the  temperature anywhere between 0 and 100.  If you've gone 79% of the way to the top, from here to here,  the temperature is 79 degrees. That's how the degrees are  introduced, and that's the Centigrade scale,  and you guys know there are different scales.  You can have the Fahrenheit scale.  You can have any other scale in which what you want to call the  temperature is different. Somebody thinks it's 0,  somebody thinks it's 32, and you can again call this  something else, and you can divide this  interval into 100 parts, 180 parts,  whatever you like, but the philosophy is the same.  You have to find two points which are reproducible  conveniently and divide the region between them into some  number of equal steps. If it's 100 equal steps,  you say it's a Centigrade scale, provided the lowest one is  called 0. This is how you have  to do it. Now, there are some problems  with this. One problem is that the boiling  point of water does not seem to be very reliable,  because if you boil water on an aspen, for example,  you know it doesn't seem to boil.  It seems to boil more readily than in the plains.  You can ask, how do you know that?  Maybe it is still doing the same thing.  I don't know. I don't know if anything  cooks some rice or vegetables. I find they don't cook at all  in Denver. It boils before it cooks.  That way, we know it's probably boiling earlier in the mountains  than in the plains. So, who's going to decide what  the real temperature is? So, you have to be more  careful when you say boiling point and freezing point,  because things don't boil, they don't seem to boil at a  certain predictable and fixed temperature.  There are very deep arguments. I have never appreciated fully  when I was learning the subject. I said, it's all cyclic  definition, because you may not know that the temperature is  changing, because this is a thermometer.  By postulate, it's going to be the temperature by definition.  How can it be wrong? What's wrong is that we know  it's not a reliable method, because physical phenomena  like when your rice will cook are not reproduced by the boiling  point of water. It cooks in the plains,  and that's important. So, we know the boiling point  is to blame. The rice is the rice.  That's how we know that that's not a good measure.  Nowadays, people have much fancier measures,  and I will tell you a little bit about that.  But for a long time, this was a very good start.  Don't worry about the fact that water boils differently in  different altitudes. You could go to sea level,  and that's a good enough definition.  Sea level is pretty much constant all over the world,  and you can say the pressure at sea level is the pressure at sea  level, and the pressure at sea level is the G-H of the  atmosphere. Okay, so that's the usual  definition of temperature. Now, the trouble started when  people realized that if you make a thermometer with your favorite  fluid, maybe mercury, and I make one with alcohol,  they will agree at 0 and they will agree at 100,  because that's how you fixed it. You rigged it,  so at 0, everyone says 0, 100, everyone says 100.  So, if you make a thermometer with your favorite fluid,  you may think it's 75 degrees or 75 degrees.  I say it's 75 if my fluid has climbed three-fourths of the way  to the top. At that point,  yours may not have climbed three-fourths of the way.  In other words, you've got two things,  two graphs, which at 0 and 100 agree.  One graph may be like this, one may be like that,  so that when I think it is 75, you may think it's 72,  but it's not true that all liquids expand at the same rate.  So, you will have to then pick one liquid and say,  we swear by that liquid, and when that liquid's gone  halfway, we will say it's 50 degrees.  So, you'll have to pick a liquid, you'll have to have an  international convention, you know, there's an alcohol  lobby and there's no alcohol lobby, they argue.  Finally, they found out a much better solution than these  liquids. They found out that if you use  a gas, you can define temperature using gases,  which have some very, very nice properties.  And this is the gas thermometer that I'm going to tell you now.  So, here's how you build a gas thermometer.  You take some gas in a container, a typical container  for me in all, whenever I draw anything  thermodynamics, it's going to be gas inside  the container, with some weights on it,  and that defines the pressure of the gas.  Of course, the pressure will be the mg of these weights,  divided by the area of the cylinder, that's the pressure,  plus atmospheric pressure. The volume is this,  whatever the volume is, base times height.  Here's what we ask you to do. Take the product of pressure  and measure any sample of gas. Take some gas,  put it in this tank, and now put it on different  surfaces, like a hot plate, like a stove,  like a tub of water, and measure the temperature  using some standard method up to that point,  like a mercury thermometer. What you notice is that the  temperature measured by some reasonable scheme shows that the  temperature of the product pV lies on a straight line.  If you connect the dots, you find the product pV is  linear in this temperature variable.  And this is zero degrees, and this is 100 degrees.  Now, here is the beauty of the gas thermometer.  If you take a different gas, and you put a different amount  of a different gas in a different cylinder,  you will get some other graph. It may look like this.  For you, that is zero and that's 100.  But, most important thing is that's also a straight line.  If that's also a straight line, it has the following  implication you guys can prove at your own leisure,  which is that if I think that my gas has climbed 56% of the way  of this height to the top, so the temperature is 56  degrees, I ask, what's your gas done?  You'll find it's also climbed 56% of the way.  It's a property of straight lines.  You can show that if it took two straight lines,  whatever be their slope, if they agree,  if this is zero, this is 100,  it's got a different slope. When you have climbed to the  halfway point, draw a line at 50 degrees and  ask, what has any gas done? They would all have climbed to  the halfway point, from the zero point to the  100 point. In other words,  gas thermometers will not only agree at the end points where  they must by construction, they seem to agree all the way  in between. But, that is one requirement.  This gas has to be very dilute.  The more dilute it is, the better it comes out.  So, take neon or freon or whatever you like.  Don't pump it up with a lot of gas.  Put the least amount of gas you can get away with.  Then you find all gases have the property that if you calibrate  them at 0 and 100, they agree in between.  Is that clear to you? Take the product P times V of  your gas by putting it on different surfaces,  plot this graph. Whenever you're on ice,  you call that 0. Whenever you're on boiling  water, you call it 100. You find the joint,  they're connected by a straight line.  Then, every point in between, if divided equally,  leads to equal increase in the product P times V.  So, P times V for a gas is better than the volume of  mercury or volume of water because it doesn't depend on the  temperature. So, everybody can use the gas  thermometer. That's why we prefer the gas  thermometer. This is the interesting issue  about measurement or definitions and cyclic definitions.  You've got to be careful. The laws of nature allow you to  pick anything you like that varies with temperature and use  that as a definition of temperature,  as a thermometer. So, why are some thermometers  preferred over the others? They're preferred over the  other thermometers. Why doesn't nature take the  simplest form when described in terms of those thermometers?  In other words, take a meter stick.  What makes a good meter stick for a standard?  You say the one that doesn't expand, but we don't know what  that means because that meter stick is a standard.  By definition, it's right. But then,  you will soon find out that's not really that simple because  there are good and bad meter sticks.  For example, the same meter stick at one time of the year  is a good meter stick at another time of the year,  then we know that it's not a good meter stick.  Similarly, there are good and bad thermometers,  and people arrive on the gas thermometer this way.  If you have a gas thermometer, something very interesting came  out of the gas thermometer. If you cool it below zero,  and you ask, which way is it going?  I don't know how low you could go.  In the old days, people couldn't go far below  zero. But nowadays, we can go to one  billionth of a degree above a certain point.  Now, these thermometers indicate somehow the product PV  vanishes at a temperature which is minus 273.16,  suggesting that there is something very special about that  temperature. Because if you took another  gas, well, I'm going to do a little cheating here,  that also extrapolates to that same temperature.  So, all gases, all gas thermometers say that  there is something very special about this temperature because  that's when our pressures all vanish.  So, as you cool a given amount of gas, even at a given volume,  if you keep the volume constant and ask, what pressure do I  need, how many weights do I have to put on,  that decreases and vanishes at this temperature.  And this is called the absolute zero of temperature.  It's called absolute zero for many reasons.  One is that unlike the zero of the centigrade,  which is by no means the absolute lowest possible  temperature, the absolute zero is the  lowest possible temperature. Why?  Because the gas pressure can be reduced and reduced and  reduced, but the worst that can happen is it can go to zero.  That's it. You cannot go below having no  pressure. We'll find in other ways  also. This is the temperature at  which you will see conceptually no further cooling is possible.  That will require you to understand what hot and cold  mean. But right now,  this says all gas thermometers point to this temperature.  So, people decided, you know what,  calling this the zero is kind of artificial.  That's based on human obsession with water.  But if you think the laws of science describe the whole  universe, what about planets where there's no water?  Right? You cannot describe,  suppose you're talking to a different civilization,  planet of the apes. You want to tell those guys,  we're going to set up our temperatures.  Zero is when water freezes and they say,  what is this thing called? Water, you know,  it's the stuff you drink. Well, you don't know what these  apes are drinking. Maybe they're drinking methane  or hydrogen gas, liquid hydrogen.  We don't know. On the other hand,  if you take any vapor and wait till the product of the pressure  and volume go to zero, let's call that the zero.  That's the universal standard. It's not tied to something  called water. It was fine for a while,  but it is not fine as a universal aspiration for  thermometers. So, zero temperature is going  to be set from here. Once they did that,  they called that the zero, they needed one other  temperature. And they decided that,  see, if you're starting the new temperature scale,  you will put the zero not at the centigrade,  but this is now called Kelvin. And everything will follow a  straight line, but to define what one degree  means, you've got to define one other temperature.  That's how we define the straight line.  That temperature will be called 273.16.  But this point is called the triple point of water.  What's the triple point of water?  You know water and ice can coexist, and you know that  water and steam can coexist at 100 degrees.  But by varying the pressure and temperature and volume,  you can actually find a certain magical point in which both ice,  water, and steam can coexist simultaneously.  It cannot pick between those three options.  Ice floating on water is when water is not decided whether to  use it or not. It's when water and steam  coexist. That's the coexistence point of  two things. And when the water starts  boiling in your stove, that's when water and steam  coexist. But I'm saying there are  certain conditions of pressure and temperature and volume so  that water, ice, and steam will coexist.  Now, that is a unique situation.  You cannot get to that by any other means.  And that temperature we will call 273.16 in these absolute  units. So, basically what you have  done by going to the absolute units is you have shifted the  zero to a more natural point where all graphs meet.  Then you defined 1 degree Kelvin to be so that 273.16 of  that Kelvin brings you to the triple point of water.  So, if you found that confusing, I'm just saying the  boiling point of water is not a fixed number.  You go to the mountains, it changes.  But only under one condition can water and ice and steam  coexist. And you cannot get that any  other way. So, everybody will agree on  that particular situation and that will be called 273.16  Kelvin. Now, there is a rule,  apparently. You can say degree centigrade.  You're not supposed to say degree Kelvin.  That's a big deal made in a lot of books.  I keep forgetting and say, in fact, I forgot again and  nothing terrible has happened to me.  You should pay too much attention to whether you can  call something degree Kelvin or simply Kelvin.  I think the purpose of language is to have no ambiguities.  But when I say degree Kelvin and I find that you guys don't get  confused, I don't think that's a big deal.  What you'll find, if you're a very erudite  person, you will never write degree Kelvin.  But having said that, don't hold me to those  standards. I just don't feel any  affiliation with this particular completely artificial and empty  term. But you are supposed to remember  if you take the GRE or something, it's not called  degree Kelvin. Okay, so as far as we are  concerned, the Kelvin scale is like the centigrade scale except  the zero has shifted to here. That's it.  That's the temperature scale you will use.  That's the absolute temperature.  Whenever I write T from now on, I'm talking about Kelvin,  not centigrade. No, that's all about heat.  I mean, all about temperature. Now, I'm going to talk about  heat. So, heat is denoted by the  symbol Q. You've got to ask yourself,  what are we talking about when we talk about heat?  Again, let's use your intuitive sense of what heat is.  You say, I have a bucket of water.  I want to heat it up. And how do you do that?  You put the bucket on top of something else which you think  is hotter. And when the two are brought  together, somehow the water begins to feel hotter and  hotter. So, we say we've heated the  water and we say we have transferred heat.  Now, people were not sure what really was being transferred.  What is it that's going from the stove to the water?  Why is it that the stove, if it's not plugged in,  is getting cooler and the water is getting hotter?  They just decided to call it the caloric fluid.  They imagined that there was a certain fluid which is abundant  in hot things and not so abundant in cold things.  When you put hot and cold together, this magical fluid  flows from hot to cold. And in that process,  heats up the cold thing. And they decided to measure it  in calories. And so, you have to define what  a calorie is. In other words,  you want to ask, how much heat does it take to  heat this bucket of water? And the rule they made up was,  we're going to define something called a calorie,  where the number of calories you need is equal to the mass of  water times the change in temperature.  And that's going to be calories. In other words,  if I had a container with 10 grams of water and the  temperature went up, I'm sorry,  the temperature went up. If you have one gram of water  and you did something to it and the temperature went up by seven  degrees, you have, by definition,  pumped in seven calories. If this was a kilogram of  water, this would be called a kilocalorie.  So, sometimes I use grams and calories, sometimes I use  kilograms and calories, but the definitions are  consistent. If you put a kilo in the gram,  put a kilo in the calories. Okay, now suppose you say,  I don't want to just talk about water, I want to talk about  heating something else. Maybe I want to heat a gram of  copper. So, then you write down the  following rule. The amount of heat it takes,  is proportional to the amount of anything.  Pick your own favorite material, gold.  Then the amount of heat, I think we can all appreciate,  must be proportional to the amount of stuff you're trying to  heat up. That's our intuitive notion.  If you've got one chunk of gold that takes some number of  calories, you have a second identical chunk.  By definition, that should take the same number of calories.  You put them together, it is clear that whatever this  calorie fluid is, you need double that.  It's proportional to the mass of the substance.  And it's got to be proportional to what you're aiming for,  namely, an increase in temperature.  But this is true for any substance, whether you're  eating copper or wood or gold. No matter what you're heating,  it is true the heat needed is proportional to the mass and to  the temperature. So, what is it that  distinguishes one material from another?  We put a number here, and that number is called the  specific heat. The specific heat is a  coefficient of that material.  You've got to understand certain formulas will depend on  certain parameters in a generic way and some things that depend  on the actual material.  In fact, that's a similar quantity.  I mean, maybe I'll take a second to tell you.  If you go to liquids that I said were expanding,  you can do the same thing. Take a rod and start heating  it up and ask, how much will it expand?  If I heat it by some amount ΔT, what will it be  proportional to? Can anybody think of what it  may be proportional to? Yes?  Student is asking a question.  It depends on the original length of the rod.  Now, why is that? Why do we think it's got to be  proportional to the length of the rod?  Yeah, it's based on what it had before.  Yes?  That's correct. I think one way to say that  is, take a meter stick, it expands by some amount.  Put another meter stick next to it, that expands by the same  amount by definition of identical things.  But for the two-meter stick, it will expand by twice as  much. So, we put the length of that.  So, no matter what you're heating, a block of wood,  block of steel, this is true.  Then, the fact that heat has different effects on copper  versus wood is indicated by putting a number here.  That alpha is called the coefficient of linear expansion,  and that depends on the material.  These are true no matter what you're heating.  So, these specific numbers, these coefficients,  these alphas that come in, are going to come in all the  time. Here's another one.  Let's play this game one more time.  We can ask, how much is the volume of a body changed when I  heat it? Well, the change in the  volume, again, will be proportional to the  starting volume times the increase in temperature.  Then, you put another number, that's called the coefficient  of volume expansion. And that depends on the  material. So, if you take copper,  copper will have a certain alpha.  Iron will have a different alpha.  Wood will have a different alpha.  This is the property of the material.  If you say, well, I had something,  and when I heated it up by one degree, it increased by nine  inches, another one increased by two inches,  is it clear that the first one expands more readily?  It's not, because the first one could have been a mile long,  second one could have been a foot long.  So, you have to take out certain factors that are universal,  and the rest of it you put into a property of the material.  Similarly, when you come to specific heat,  how much heat does it take to heat some object?  It depends on the mass. It doesn't matter what you're  heating. It depends on the increase in  temperature, because that's the whole purpose of adding heat.  It's always going to be linear in the ΔT.  This one is a property of the material.  And by definition, C equal to one calorie per  gram or one kilocalorie per kilogram for water.  So, remember, one calorie per gram for water is a  definition. Once you define water to have  a specific heat of one calorie per gram, you can define  specific heat for other materials by the following  process. So, what do you do?  You take a container with some water in it.  Let's assume the container has zero mass, so I don't have to  worry about it. It's an approximation.  So, I take that, you know, take a huge container so  that the volume of water dominates the surface area of  the container. Anyway, container is neglected.  You've got some water. This water is at some initial  temperature T1. And I have some new material,  lead, and I want to find its specific heat.  So, I take the lead in the form of pellets, and I heat the lead  pellets to some temperature T2.  Then, I put the pellets into this water.  That would be an example where initially the lead is in  equilibrium, maybe on a furnace,  at temperature T2, water is in equilibrium,  maybe in the room at temperature T1.  Then, I put the pellets into the water.  There will be a period when the temperature is not defined.  Then, soon they will settle down to some common temperature  called T.  We will now postulate. This is a postulate or a law.  The total change in q is zero.  In other words, if q is lost by one body and  gained by another body, the loss and the gain must  equal. It's the new law.  Now, you can make up all the new laws you want.  You don't know if they're right, but this is the law you first  make up. In that case,  you know what's going to happen in this particular problem.  In any of these heat problems, I urge you to draw the  following picture. Here is one temperature.  Here is another temperature. Here is the final one,  which we don't know, but we can measure,  put a thermometer and measure it.  Then, you say the mass of the water times specific heat of  water, which is 1, times ΔT,  which is the final temperature minus initial temperature,  is equal to 0. This is a little for the lead  pellet, mass of the lead. Lead has got a symbol Pb times  specific heat, which I don't know,  times the change in temperature, which is T  final minus T2, is equal to 0.  The sum of all the mcΔT is zero.  This is the gain of heat of the water.  This, if you work it out, will be a negative number,  because you can see T final is below initial T.  This will turn out to be negative, and the positive and  negative will add up to zero. So, what is it you don't know?  Well, you know the mass of the water.  Specific heat of water is 1 by definition.  T final and T1 are measured by thermometers.  Mass of lead is for you to measure.  And you can find C. So, this is a birthday present  for you guys. If you ever see this in an  exam, jump on this first, because you've been doing this  in high school, and I know kids love this kind  of calorimeter problems. Yes?  Student asking a question.  Yes? That's correct.  So, the real point is, if everything expanded  linearly, we won't have the disagreement between different  thermometers. So, it turns out,  to an excellent approximation, the change in length is  proportional to the length. But it's not exactly proportional  to the length. There will be terms involving  higher powers of length. Not only that,  specific heat of materials is also not a constant.  We say specific heat of water is 1.  At a certain temperature range, it'll be 1.  At a different range, in fact, it's not quite 1.  I told you long back, everything I tell you is  wrong. The question is,  how many decimal places do you have to go to before you unearth  my fallacies? Specific heat of materials is  not a constant. It's a big industry,  calculating the specific heat of materials starting from atoms  and quantum mechanics. So, none of the things treated  as constants are ever constants, including those alphas and  equations. I can always fudge it by  saying alpha itself may depend on the temperature,  and also the dependence on L may not be linear.  But you should also look at dimensional considerations and  say, if it's not L, if you want to put an L  square as a correction to the formula,  to match the units, the L squared has to be  divided by another length to keep the units.  What other length do we have? It may turn out to be the  intra-atomic spacing. So, once the atomic properties  come into play, then you can find ways to  solve these equations. So, all these laws are,  in fact, very tentative and approximative.  These are pretty ancient physics.  I think the way I do the physics course here,  sometimes I'm in the 1600, sometimes in the 1400,  sometimes in the year 2000, so it's going back and forth.  This is way back when people did not even know about atoms.  So, they were trying to do the best they can.  And what you found empirically is that once you found a  specific heat for lead, right, you solve for it,  and you find that you're using that value.  And you find if you use the right values,  ΔQ does add up to zero. Again, when you say it adds up  to zero, it adds up to zero to a very good approximation during  that epoch. Another epoch when people do  more and more accurate experiments, everything gets  shot down. In fact, specific heats of all  materials seem to go to zero when you approach absolute  temperature. You have to understand the laws  of quantum physics to know why that happens.  So, this is a period when people are probing temperature  ranges, which are around room temperature or boiling and  freezing point water, which is a very narrow window  in temperature. If you look at the history of  the universe, you've got incredibly high  temperatures near the Big Bang. And even now,  the rest of the universe is bathed at some temperature that  happens to be very, very low, which is near 3  degrees. It's called the black body  radiation from the Big Bang. So, the temperature of the  universe goes through huge ranges.  When you probe different ranges, you see different physics.  If you come to Sloan Lab, you can go to temperatures way  below one degree Kelvin or a hundredth of a Kelvin.  And we heard a talk last year, physics at one billionth of a  Kelvin. So, you want to cool them and  cool them and cool down. But zero degree Kelvin,  see, there I go. Zero Kelvin is a barrier we're  not able to cross, just like the velocity of  light is something we're not able to cross.  These are all big surprises. The fact that velocity has an  impact on temperature is not obvious, not obvious even to  Newton. Why not?  Why not put rockets on top of rockets?  Likewise, why not build better and better refrigerators?  The reason you cannot go below zero is when you go to zero,  all the mechanical attributes like pressure simply vanish and  they cannot have negative values.  You will see more about this when you understand heat in  greater depth. Anyway, right now,  ΔQ equal to zero is the rule you use.  I'm sure you guys know how to do these problems.  So, I'm going to put some ice in.  I just want to mention that to you.  The twist is the following. So, I take some ice.  Ice, by the way, is not always at zero.  You know, you can go below zero. Your refrigerator is several  degrees below, several tens below zero.  So, let's take ice. And let me measure.  I take this container. I put some ice at,  say, minus 30 degrees. I've gone to centigrade now so  I take some ice. And I put it on some source of  heat. And I watch how many calories  are coming in. Let me arrange a device that  will pump in a fixed number of calories every second.  So, as a function of time, I'm expecting the temperature  of this to go up. Do you understand that?  In every second, I get some number of calories.  And those number of calories are going to produce for me  the temperature of the ice. So, the temperature of the ice  is going to be delta T. M and C are constants,  so delta Q is proportional to delta T.  But if you divide both by the time elapsed, then the rate at  which the temperature rises will be the rate at which the heat  flows into the system. If heat is flowing at a steady  rate, temperature should rise, and indeed it does.  Temperature of the ice goes from minus 30 to minus 20 to  minus 20. So, I get stuck.  I know heat is coming in, but it's not getting hotter.  But I notice that the ice is beginning to melt.  There will be a period between here and here when I pump in  calories, I don't get any increase in temperature,  but I get conversion of ice into water.  And that will be a period when this guy looks like some water  and he puts a chunk of ice on it.  And until all the ice is converted to water,  the whole system is stuck at that temperature.  That's a very interesting property.  Now, if you really took a real pot and you put a chunk of ice  on it, you know what will happen, right?  The bottom of the ice will melt. It may even evaporate.  That's not what I'm talking about because that's not a system  where there's a globally defined temperature.  So, if you put a chunk of ice on it globally,  the minute you put a little bit of calories,  give it enough time for all these guys to share that heat,  so that the whole system has one single common temperature.  Then, let's watch the temperature rise.  I'm saying it gets stuck at zero, but your calories are  getting you something. They're converting ice into  water. Then, you can ask,  okay, what penalty do I have to pay?  That's called the latent heat of melting.  And again, I know only in calories per gram,  but you can ask for water. Some of your ΔQ now goes not  to raise the temperature, but to melt some amount of  stuff at the latent heat of melting.  That's how much Q you need to melt that amount of stuff,  and the L varies from substance to substance.  For water, it's 80 calories per gram.  If you want to melt mercury from solid mercury to liquid  mercury, it's 80 calories per gram.  Then, once everybody has become water, then that uniform system  of water starts growing. And this is called a phase  change. A phase change is when it  changes its atomic arrangement from a regular arrays,  for example, that forms a solid,  into a liquid. In a solid, everybody has his  place. You can shake around where you  are, but liquid, you can run around.  The specific heat of ice is not the same as the specific heat of  water. So, you've got to be careful,  even though it's still made up of water molecules.  The calories needed to heat one gram of ice is roughly half what  it takes to heat one gram of water.  So, in these problems, don't make the mistake.  Okay, then you go along, and I guess you know what the  next stopping point is. When you come to 100 degrees,  again, it gets stuck until everybody vaporizes,  and then you get steam. Then, you can have superheated  vaporization even higher than 100 degrees.  So, that's the latent heat of vaporization.  I really don't even want to write something.  I think it's 500 and something calories per gram.  That's information I don't carry in my head.  So, if I tell you I took some ice at minus 30 and I dumped in  5,000 calories, where will it end up?  You've got to first spend a few calories going from here to  there. If you've got some more money  left, you can start melting this.  Maybe you'll run out of stuff there, then that's what you will  have. Some amount of water and some  amount of ice. If you've got even more  calories at your disposal, you can melt it all and start  heating it. You may come this way and you  may be running out of calories. If not, keep going here and  there and there, and you may end up there if  you've got enough calories. Or one can ask a question,  how many calories does it take to convert ice at minus 30 to  100? You'll have to do the mcΔd  for that, m times latent heat for this, mcΔd for that,  and m times latent heat of vaporization for that.  So, the kind of problems you can get are fairly simple most of  the time. The only kind of problem where  you can really get in trouble is the following.  I will mention that to you. Suppose I take some water and  I take some ice. So, this is zero.  The ice is at say minus 40, water is at plus 80.  In fact, let me make that also at plus 40.  I bring them together and I ask you what will happen.  Now, this is a subtle problem. If you had water at 40 and you  had water at 20, you can easily guess that it  is going to melt somewhere in between.  You can calculate it. Now, it's more subtle.  You've got water at 40, you've got ice at minus 40,  you bring them together and ask what happens.  Well, the answer will depend on how much of this stuff you have.  If by water at 40 you mean the Atlantic Ocean and by ice you  mean a couple of ice cubes, we know what's going to happen.  These guys are going to get clobbered, they're going to  melt, you will end up somewhere here.  Then, you can easily calculate the final temperature by saying  this delta T for water in magnitude is going to be the  heat given to this. Heat given to this is the  mcΔT to come here, then the heat to melt the  amount of ice, then the heat to raise the  amount of water to that final temperature.  Then, you can solve for the final temperature.  So, if you want to solve this problem and I give you some mass  for this ice of water and I give you some mass for the ice,  you can first make the optimistic assumption that you  can solve this problem as water, but at an unknown  temperature. You call that unknown  temperature T. This is the T1,  this is the T2. Write your equations,  except you will have one more term there.  That's the heat it takes to melt the ice.  You solve for T. If you get a positive answer,  you can use it, because the assumption that you  ended up on water meant you heated up the ice,  you melted the ice into water, then you heated up the water  from zero to the final water. But if you did the calculation  on a negative value of T, that answer cannot be blindly  used, because the assumption that you're on the other side of  ice is wrong. Then, you can try something  else. You can assume you're down here.  If you think you're down here, then you've simply heated the  ice from here to here. This water you brought down to  zero, sucked out mcΔT from that, then you've taken out now the  latent heat of melting. You take out heat when you  need it, and then you've taken even more to come down here.  Then, all those losses of the original water is equal to the  gain of this ice. You can assume it here.  You can solve for this T. When you solve for this T,  if you got a negative number, then you're okay.  That will be a good assumption if I say I sprinkle two drops of  water on a big iceberg. We know it's going to end up as  ice, and that's a good starting point.  But if I give you numbers which are kind of wishy-washy,  where I don't know whether this will win or that will win,  then you've got a third possibility.  The third possibility is at the end of the day,  you end up here with some amount of water and some amount of ice  at zero degrees. So, that's the third option you  may have to consider if neither of them works.  Then, the question is not what is the final temperature,  but what's the question then? What do you want to know in  that case? How much is ice and how much  is water? That's the question.  And there are several ways to figure that out.  Let me just say in words, I don't want to do this  algebra because for you guys it would be fairly easy.  If it's the question of suppose both of the things I try fail.  I took a positive T, assumed I'm up here,  and I assume the ice melted, and I get a negative answer,  that's shot down. I take a negative T and assume  everybody froze, and that doesn't work.  Then, I'm down to this option, which is some amount of water  and some amount of ice. And the question is,  how much is left? You solve that by doing the  following. You say all this ice went from  here to there. It does that by absorbing that  mcΔT, you know, mass of the ice times  specific heat of ice times ΔT. Maybe it was minus 40,  the ΔT is plus 40. You give that heat to this guy.  That heat you suck out of this guy.  First, you'll bring this to zero, then you still have some  more heat you can extract from it.  You will use that to convert water into ice at the price of  80 calories per gram. Maybe you can freeze five  grams or five kilograms of the water.  That will be the extra ice. The rest will be whatever water  you started with. The total mass will be the  same, but if you've got 60 grams of water, you bring the 60  grams to zero, and you still have some more heat to be  extracted, maybe you'll convert 10 grams to ice,  and 50 will remain as water. So, the final answer will be  50 grams of water, 10 grams of ice,  plus whatever grams of ice you started with.  That's about the most complex heat exchange problem.  If you guys want me to tell you some more, I will,  or I can move on. I don't know what your view on  this is. Do you understand what you have  to do in each problem? Okay.  So, it's the conservation of a heat that's applied.  So, the most tricky part is phase change.  When you've got a phase change, you've got to remember that the  formula mcΔT, ΔQ has one more term.  The one more term is this.  Okay. So, the next question we ask  is, what's the manner in which heat manages to flow?  We say you've got these calories.  I mean, how does it flow? What's the rate?  What makes it flow? So, it turns out there are three  popular ways of heat transfer. One is called radiation.  Radiation is when the heat energy leaves some hot body and  comes to you without the benefit of any medium,  like heat from the sun.  So, that's really electromagnetic radiation that  comes from hot glowing objects and directly comes to you,  and electromagnetic radiation doesn't need air,  doesn't need anything. In fact, if it needed air,  we will not get any heat from the sun because there is no  energy left in the sun. Most of it is just vacuum.  So, if you took one of these space heaters,  you know, with glowing red coils, and you feel warm,  if I start pumping the air out of that room,  of course, you will be dying very rapidly,  but your last thoughts will be, I am still warm,  because the radiation will keep coming to you.  Okay? That's radiation heat.  There are lots of laws for radiation.  So, if you look at their formulas and memorize,  you don't understand too much of the physics right now,  other than to say it's electromagnetic radiation,  whatever that means, we haven't gotten to that yet.  That's what comes from there to here.  It can come in vacuum. It doesn't need a medium is the  key. Then, the second way of heat  transfer is called convection.  So, convection is explained by this following example.  Let's say we have a hot plate. Then, in the lower part of it,  the water gets hot. When it gets hot,  it expands, and when it expands, the density goes down.  Therefore, by loss of buoyancy, it will start rising up.  Remember, a chunk of water belongs in water.  A chunk of something else with lower density will float to the  top. But the point is,  water doesn't have a fixed density.  If you heat it up, the density goes down,  and when the water is hot, the water will rise to the top.  When the water rises to the top, the water will rise to the  top. When the water rises to the  top, the cold water with a higher density will fall down.  So, you will set up a current. Hot rises to the top and cold  comes down, and this also happens in the atmosphere.  On a hot day, the air next to the ground gets really heated up  and it rises, and the cold air comes down,  and you set up this thermal current.  So, the heat is transferred between a region which is cold  and a region which is hot by the actual motion of some material.  In radiation, you don't have the medium  transferring heat, because the medium is not even  present in radiation. In convection,  the medium actually moves. The hot guys physically move to  the other place, and the cold guys come here,  and by that process, the heat is transferred.  The heat transfer I want to focus on is a little more  complicated, because what I want to focus on  relatively is conduction.  So, heat conduction is something you've all experienced.  I mean, if you have a skillet, why does it have a wooden  handle? Simple reason.  If you had a steel handle, you put it on the hot stove,  and you put your hand here, the fact that your body is at  some temperature, and the temperature is  probably around 200 degrees, your god knows 200 degrees,  you're going to have heat flow from here to here.  So, we want to understand what's the rate at which heat flows  from hot end to the cold end. So, you can imagine a rod of  some cross section A. One end of the rod is in some  reservoir at some temperature T1, other end is at temperature  T2. By the way, I'm now  introducing a new term called reservoir.  Reservoir is another body like you and me, except it's not like  a reservoir. It's enormous.  It is so big that its temperature cannot be changed.  You can sit on it, you will fry and you'll evaporate,  but its temperature will not change.  No body is really a reservoir. If you drop an ice cube in the  Atlantic, you lower the temperature of the Atlantic,  but by negligible amount. So, take the limit of Atlantic,  goes to infinity, then you have a reservoir.  Reservoirs have one label, namely, what's our temperature.  What's the temperature of the room?  What's the temperature of the room?  This room is like a reservoir. You put a cup of coffee here,  you say it'll come to room temperature.  Actually, the room temperature meets the coffee,  not halfway, but slightly up, right?  But the room is large enough so that we can attribute to the  room a temperature quite independent of bodies that go in  and out of it. So, this is connected on the  left to an enormous tank of maybe a water-ice mixture at 0  degrees Celsius. If we put a rod there,  we know heat is going to flow from the hot body,  from the hot end to the cold end.  And we want to write a formula for how much heat flows per  second. Again, I'm going to write these  formulas over and over again. So, you've got to ask yourself,  what will it depend on? What are the properties it'll  depend on in general, independent of what the rod is  made of? Can you think of one?  Yes?  Student asks a question.  He said the cross section. Now, why do we say,  what reason can you give for a cross?  Student asks a question.  Yes. Okay, let me repeat this argument.  You take one rod for convenience.  Let's just take it to be a rectangular rod.  Take another rod, rectangular rod.  They will both transfer the same amount of heat for a given  time. If we glue them together and  say, here is my new rod, we know it's going to transmit  twice the amount of heat. So, it's going to be  proportional to the area. And why is the heat flowing?  It's flowing because of a temperature difference.  So, that's always there. That's the underlying force for  heat transfer. That's the dynamics in  thermodynamics. That's what makes the heat  flow. But then, we find as an  empirical fact that if these two reservoirs were separated by  that distance, then the heat flow is a lot  less than when they are closer. It seems to depend on how much  temperature difference is packed in spatially.  So, you want to divide by, delta x is not  infinitesimal. It's the length of the rod  separating the hot and cold ends.  In other words, if you dilute the temperature  difference over one mile, the heat flow will be  correspondingly reduced. Whereas, if there's huge  temperature difference between a very small spatial separation,  there'll be very robust flow of heat.  That's what we're saying. These happen to be true,  you realize, independent of what material I'm talking about.  When I said one rod plus one rod is two rods,  it doesn't matter what it's made of.  Again, having put all these factors, which you can argue on  general grounds, you have to now ask,  what happens when this is a copper rod versus a silver rod  versus a wooden rod? So, you've got to put one more  factor here, not k, you guys.  It's κ, and it's called the thermal conductivity of that  material.  Sometimes, you put a minus sign.  Minus sign just means it flows from hot to cold.  I don't care whether you put the plus sign or don't put the  minus sign. Anybody knows that the heat is  going to go from hot to cold. So, just remember that direction  of flow, and that's all I care about, this sign here.  This κ is the property of the material.  Once again, let me tell you, you can say,  well, I had two reservoirs, hot and cold,  I connected them with two different rods.  This rod carried twice the amount of heat per second as the  other rod. Is it necessarily a better  conductor? No, maybe it had 10,000 times  more heat. So, what you want to do is to  make the playing field level and compare rods of the same  cross-section, same temperature difference,  same length, then ask, who conducts more heat?  That depends on the material, and that's the thing you pulled  out specific to the material. That is a property of wood or  copper or steel. That's the heat conductivity.  Okay. Now, final topic.  Now, I don't want to get into too many details.  It really has to do with what is heat.  In the old days, people just said it's a fluid,  and they postulated the conservation law for the fluid.  You can postulate what you want. You've got to make sure it  works, and it seems to work in the sense that all the ΔQs in  any reaction add up to zero. But then, people were getting  hints that maybe this thing that we call heat is not entirely  independent of other things we have learned.  So, where do you get the clue? One clue is long back when we  studied mechanics. We talked about two cars.  They come and collide. They slam into one big lump.  Now, you've got no kinetic energy, no potential energy.  Potential energy is always zero. They're moving on the same  height. Kinetic energy was ½ mv  squared for this, ½ mv squared for that.  At the end, there's nothing. No kinetic, no potential.  So, you've got to make sure that the conservation of energy  doesn't apply to this problem. We just say it's inelastic.  On the other hand, we find whenever that happens,  we find the bodies become hot. Here's another thing you can do.  You can take a cannonball, drop it from a big tower.  This is how some people in the French Army, I think,  first detected this feature. You drop cannonballs from a  big height. When they hit the sand,  they get hot. Or you drill a hole in a cannon.  That's what Count somebody did. He also noticed that you need  to constantly pour water to keep the drill bit from heating up.  You find very often mechanical energy is lost and things heat  up. So, you get a suspicion.  Whatever the underlying mechanism, maybe there is a rule  that says if you lose so much mechanical energy that you  cannot account for, then it translates into a fixed  amount of calories. If that is the case,  then we'll at least get a dictionary between calories and  joules. So, joules is energy you can  see. Calories is energy you cannot  see. That was going to be the premise.  But first, you've got to prove that every time you lose some  number of joules, you get a fixed amount of  calories. And that experiment is due to  joule. Here is a joule experiment.  So, you have a little container in which there is a  hole and it tells you the whole story.  You have a little container in which there is a paddle.  This is a shaft with a pulley and there's a weight here.  So, look, I tried to imagine this, guys.  You've got rope wrapped around the top pulley and when you let  this weight go down, it's going to go down like  this, it's going to spin the shaft.  And it's going to turn up the water.  So, it's like this thing, the egg beater, right?  In fact, I tried to do the experiment with the egg beater  this summer to a bunch of high school kids and I got thoroughly  humiliated because nothing happened as planned.  Okay, but the idea is the same. You agitate the water in some  fashion. But this guy did it in a  particular simple way. My egg beating was not good  enough. You will see maybe in a while  why that's not good. What he did was to put these  things together and let the weight go down from there to  here. Now, we can keep track of how  much mechanical energy is lost, right?  Because if this mass was at rest and it dropped to height  Mg, dropped to height H, it's supposed to have Mgh  kinetic energy. Let's say it's got some kinetic  energy which is not equal to Mgh.  So, Mgh minus kinetic energy is missing.  So, what happens when the water gets hot?  Well, the water gets hot. When the water gets hot,  you can immediately ask, how many calories was supplied  to the water? Because that water heats up  the same way whether or not you put it on a hot plate or whether  or not you churn it. It doesn't seem to depend on how  it got hot. This has the same effect.  This water is hot in every real sense.  So, you must have put some calories.  So, you can find out how many calories you put in by looking  at the increase in temperature. That is one,  looking at the increase in temperature.  So, some joules are missing, some calories have been pumped  into the water. Then you ask,  is there a proportionality between joules and the calories?  And you find there is. And that happens to be four  points to joules per calorie.  In other words, if you can expand four points  to joules of mechanical energy, you got yourself one calorie to  be used for whatever heating purposes.  So, in the example of the colliding cars,  this had some energy. That has some energy all  measured in joules. They slam together,  they come to rest. That means you can take those  many joules, divide by four points to get some number of  calories. Imagine the whole car is made  out of copper. Then those calories will  produce an increase in temperature, right, equal to  ΔQ is mcΔT. That will be the rise in  temperature of the car. In practice, there will be other  losses because you heard the sound.  Well, that's some energy gone. You won't get it back.  Maybe sparks are flying. That's light energy that's  gone. If you subtract all that out,  you find that in the end, the calories explain the  number of joules. So, that made people think that  this is just another form of energy.  Because if you add this to your energy balance,  there is no reason to go on apologizing for the law of  conservation of energy. The law of conservation of  energy is not in fact violated even in the inelastic collision,  if you include heat as a form of energy.  And the conversion factor is 4.2 joules per calorie.  The question is, what right do you have to call  it energy? Energy, we think,  primarily when you say somebody's energetic,  you mean that someone's running around mindlessly back and  forth, right? Energy is associated with  motion. These two cars were moving and  they have every right to say they have energy.  How about potential energy? Well, if this car starts  climbing up a hill and slows down, we think it's got potential.  You let it go, it'll come back and give you  the kinetic energy. So, most people's idea of  energy is energy. That is lost.  And yet, you get calories in return, so you ask yourself,  what can it be? Well, the correct answer to  that came only when we understood that everything is  made up of atoms. Once you grant that everything  is made up of atoms, then it turns out that kinetic  energy of atoms is what we call heat.  But it got me very careful. Take a tank full of gas.  That's what I call heat. That whole tank is moving.  That's not what I call heat, okay?  That motion you can see. I'm talking about a tank of  gas that doesn't seem to be going anywhere.  Yet, it got motion energy because the little guys are  going back and forth. So, what we will find,  this is what I'm going to show you next time,  is that if you kept track of the kinetic energy of every  single molecule in this car, every single molecule in that  car, if you kept track of them before and after,  and you added them up, you will get exactly the same  number. The only difference will be,  originally the car has got global common velocity,  macroscopic velocity, you can see.  On top of it, it's got random motion of the molecules that  make up the car. So does the other car.  When they're slammed together, the macroscopic motion is  completely gone and all the motion is thermal motion.  But it's still kinetic energy and that's what we will see  next time.